---
layout: post
title:      "Web Development: You Can Code Your Own Way (Code Your Own Way)"
date:       2018-03-19 21:43:00 -0400
permalink:  web_development_you_can_code_your_own_way_code_your_own_way
---

The assigned topic for this first post was, “Why did you decide to learn software development?”  While this is certainly an interesting question, I honestly don’t think I’d be able to respond with an answer lengthy or interesting enough to justify giving it its own blog post…  

…but lucky for you, dear reader, I love to talk about myself, so for the record: I’m licensed as a K-12 music teacher, but currently moonlight as a freelance classical musician in and around New York City, and I’ve supplemented that with jobs in food service for most of the last decade.  I love working with food and I’ve learned a lot from my years in the service sector—food safety and preparation, for sure, but primarily people skills, like how to deal with annoying coworkers, or with customers who act rudely because they’re hungry or drunk (or both!)—but I knew that I was capable of bigger and better things.  Like most people trying to break into programming, I was looking for something a little less mind-numbing than making sandwiches, or talking about the weather every five minutes, or punching numbers into a cash register, or {*insert your less-than-satisfactory job description here*}.  

Enter Ryan, a dear friend of mine who graduated from Flatiron School nearly two years ago and has been working as a developer ever since.  He truly loves his job and because of his time at Flatiron, he’s damn good at it.  Consequently, it didn’t take much arm-twisting for him to convince me that programming would be a great route for a bright guy like me.  I tried out Flatiron’s free online Bootcamp Prep Course and I was hooked immediately.  I deeply enjoyed the puzzle-like nature of trying to build functioning programs, the way I had to bridge the gap between left and right brain to reach a viable solution.  Coding has filled a void for me, requiring me to be simultaneously logical and creative, and it’s certainly got me back to working out those little muscles in my brain that nearly atrophied away because I almost forgot they were there. 

My story probably sounds a lot like your story, though…from what I’ve seen, it’s pretty run-of-the-mill for this field.  Far more interesting, however, is the way things have turned out since I started as a student at Flatiron School.

I began Flatiron’s fifteen-week immersive, intensive, in-person course in Full Stack Web Development about a month ago.  The first couple days were easy enough, and I rapidly established great rapport with the other students in my cohort (class).  Although I have introverted tendencies, I’m still an extrovert, so I enjoyed and thrived on the sense of community and collective struggle and commiseration that came from being surrounded by other people doing the same challenging thing that I was.  Unlike most others in my class, though, I commute from New Jersey, and like most people from New Jersey, I detest rush hour and rush hour traffic.  As such, I decided to wake up at 5:00 AM every weekday to avoid the crowds and typically got to school by about 7:15 AM.  However, this didn’t go over so well for a night owl incapable of falling asleep before 2:00 AM; although I could make up some sleep on the train, I would start to crash by mid-morning and stumble through the rest of the day.  My training as an educator reminded me that the equation I had laid out for myself was severely unbalanced: lack of sleep simply doesn’t beget effective knowledge acquisition.  

As the coursework became progressively more difficult and the workload piled up before my eyes, I began to enter “panic mode.”  My poorly-rested brain could barely process the most basic concepts, let alone the more advanced methods that scaffolded upon at least a rudimentary grasp of the previous information.  The sheer volume of work looming ahead, along with Code Challenges and cumulative Final Projects, was enough to give me a full-blown anxiety attack.  I felt tired, frustrated, hopelessly lost, sick, burnt out, stupid.  One particularly bad night, I lay in my bed and cried, unable to sleep, while my heart pounded and the knot in my stomach twisted and writhed.  *Would I have to repeat the first three weeks of the program?  Would I get kicked out altogether?  Was I actually smart enough, a competent enough programmer to tackle the course, or was I a dumb fraud, a fake, a charlatan?*  Flatiron School’s motto is “Learn, Love, Code”…but I had reached a point where I wasn’t fulfilling any of those three tenets: I wasn’t learning, and although I could, on occasion, sleepily cobble together a few working lines of code, I no longer loved what I was doing.  In fact, I could feel myself beginning to truly hate coding, and I legitimately wondered what had compelled me to get myself into this mess in the first place.  Surely there was a way to go about doing this without falling into a pit of oblivion and despair.

There was.  It came to me in the shower, as many good ideas do (and fortunately before the hot water ran out!)  Flatiron School only offers two tracks to complete their Full Stack Web Development program: the in-person course that lasts fifteen weeks, and an online course in which you work remotely and set your own pace.  I had initially shot down the idea of enrolling in the online course because I know I lack the willpower and discipline to sit at home in my room and code all day without succumbing to distractions.  But the in-person course moved too quickly for me and operated within a schedule to which I couldn’t physically adapt, no matter how much I loved my peers and working environment.  What, then, if I were to combine aspects of each into a de facto “hybrid” course?  One where I could come into school only after getting a full night of sleep—or stay home if I felt so inclined—where I could read and work at my own pace and process the material more deeply, moving on only when I felt truly comfortable? 

It all sounds a little too good to be true, doesn’t it?  And yet this is exactly the schedule I’ve followed since switching into Flatiron’s online course two weeks ago, with remarkable results.  I typically arrive to school around noon, grab lunch with my friends, and settle in for a productive day of studying.  Now that I'm back on my regular sleep schedule, I’m much more awake, alert, and active, and I’ve found that my comprehension of the coursework is far greater than it was before.  I still get to sit with my cohort, watch their blog post presentations, and participate in “Feelings Friday,” a weekly reflection session during which students sit in a circle and each person has a chance to share their thoughts about the past week.  The school day ends at 18:00, but I can easily work until 21:00 or 22:00 before I start to lose steam.  If I’m stuck on a problem, which happens with some frequency, I have nearly instantaneous access to an entire team of online instructors working remotely to guide us to viable solutions (without giving away the answers outright).  The same instructors also give lectures and host study groups at all times of day (some as late as 23:00!) as to cater to all time zones and chronotypes.  I think I speak for my fellow night owls when I say that we’re incredibly appreciative.

At risk of sounding like a salesman, there are financial benefits to switching into the online course, as well.  Flatiron School charges $15,000 in tuition for the in-person program.  The online program, however, costs $1,500 a month with a $12,000 tuition cap, so this option can ultimately cost you significantly less if you work at a good pace, but it will never cost you more than $12,000 if you take longer than eight months to complete the curriculum.  Moreover, Flatiron School recently partnered with WeWork, a shared workspace provider with locations worldwide.  As an added bonus, each online student now receives a one-year membership to WeWork—at no cost, a $4,800 value—which allows you to use a shared workspace at a WeWork of your choice (there’s one conveniently located right next door to Flatiron), drink their amazing coffee, and participate in networking and other social activities.  But wait, there’s more!  A WeWork membership card comes with all sorts of additional perks, such as discounts at local businesses on anything from sandwiches to gym memberships, from cups of coffee to car rentals.  Proper utilization of your membership could save you hundreds of dollars during your time as a Flatiron student, all while you code at your leisure!  What’s not to love?!  

Besides discounts and free stuff, though, I also love walking.  It’s certainly not the fastest mode of transportation—I’ve definitely missed my fair share of trains and subways over the years—but it’s the one that allows me to most fully take in my surroundings, and it’s my favorite way to explore new places.  The journey to learn how to code is a marathon, and it’s one that I’m willing to walk if doing so means gaining a more profound understanding of this captivating and perplexing new skill that I so badly want to learn.  There have been and will be plenty of people who run right past me with ease, who get to the finish line way before I do.  That’s OK.  No hard feelings, seriously…I’ll be cheering you on the whole way!  But in a world full of Hares, I’m content to be a Tortoise and really take in every glorious little cranny of the World of Code, one slow and steady step at a time.





